(lively electronic music)
(keyboard clicking)
We can talk about the heapsort algorithm.
This'll be the final sort algorithm
that we look at in the course,
and so how does this algorithm work?
Well, you need a heap, so this sort algorithm
can only sort a heap.
And when we're dealing with max heaps,
and you can get the equivalent information in min heaps,
the implementation would be slightly different,
but the concepts would be the same.
So we're gonna assume we're dealing with a max heap,
and when we're dealing with a max heap
we know the root has the largest value.
And so if we have an array that is a heap
and we wanna sort that array, what we do is
we swap the root with the last element in the array.
And what I mean by that is the last element in the heap.
And so we take the root, which is the maximum value,
we swap it with the last item in the heap,
and then that means that the root is in its correct
sorted position, relative to everything else in the heap.
And then we have to heapify the tree,
we have to heapify the heap, but we exclude
the last node, so we exclude the root now.
Because the root is now in that last node,
we don't include it when we heapify the heap,
because if we did we'd end up moving the root
back up to the root and we don't wanna do that.
And so we take the item at value zero,
we swap it with the last item in the heap,
and then we heapify everything
up to the last item minus one.
And after we've done that, the new root will be
the second largest element in the heap,
and then we rinse and repeat, and so we take the new root
and we swap it with the last value in the new heap,
which we have reduced by one,
because when we swapped the root to the end,
we then reduced the size of the heap by one,
and we heapify that reduced heap and after we've done that
the new root will be the second largest element
that was in the original heap, and so we rinse and repeat.
We're gonna swap that with the last element
in the new heap and now we heapify,
we reduce the heap by one again,
so now our heap is gonna be reduced by two elements,
we heapify what's left and when we're finished,
the root will now be the third largest element
in the data set and so, again, we rinse and repeat.
And so, if you'll recall, when we did the delete method
and we had a fixed heap below method, and we had that
lastHeapIndex parameter and I said we were gonna
need it for the heap sort,
well this is why we're gonna need that parameter.
It's because on every iteration, the heap is reduced
by one and so that lastHeapIndex
gets decremented by one on each iteration,
and you'll see this in the implementation.
So this is the heap we've been looking at,
this is what it looks like in the array,
and so our lastHeapIndex, when we start, is seven,
and we're gonna swap heap[0] With [lastHeapIndex].
There's a typo here, that should be a capital I.
And so we're gonna swap 80 with 67,
and so after we've done that, this is the situation we have.
Now this isn't a heap.
If we look at the whole thing, it's not a heap.
But what we're going to do is we're now going to say,
okay, our heap ends at index six, and so we're gonna
heapify what's left, so from indexes zero to six,
we're now gonna heapify that section of the array.
And once we've done that,
this is what the array will look like.
And, as I said, our lastHeapIndex is now six.
75 is now the new root and so we're gonna rinse and repeat.
So we're gonna swap 75 with what's at the lastHeapIndex,
so now it's 52, so we're gonna swap 75 with 52.
And now we're gonna reduce the size of the heap by one,
so now we're gonna say our heap consists
of elements zero to five, and we're gonna heapify
this part of the array.
And after we've done that, we'll have this situation.
So these two are no longer part of the heap,
they are now in sorted order and now we have
the third largest element at the top of the array.
The lastHeapIndex is five, so this is our heap now
and we're going to rinse and repeat.
We're not gonna continue now, I think you get the idea,
but what we would do is swap 68 with 40
and then we'd heapify elements zero to four
and when we're finished 67 should be at the root,
because it's now the largest value of the remaining heap
and our heap would consist of elements zero to four.
So the lastHeapIndex would be reduced to four.
And we keep doing that until, of course,
we just hit the one element and at that point
our heap is sorted.
Now it's possible there's more array beyond here,
but this part of the array was never part of the heap.
Okay, so that's it for how this works.
Let's go ahead now and implement the algorithm.
I'll see you in the next video.